Docs: Plugin E2E - Update docs (#858)
grafana/plugin-tools: docusaurus/docs/e2e-test-a-plugin/migrate-from-grafana-e2e.md

---
id: migrate-from-grafana-e2e
title: Migrate from @grafana/e2e
description: How to migrate from @grafana/e2e to @grafana/plugin-e2e
keywords:
  - grafana
  - plugins
  - plugin
  - testing
  - e2e
  - end-to-end
  - migrate
sidebar_position: 90
---

import Tabs from '@theme/Tabs';
import TabItem from '@theme/TabItem';
import ScaffoldPluginE2InstallNPM from '@snippets/plugin-e2e-install.npm.md';
import ScaffoldPluginE2EInstallPNPM from '@snippets/plugin-e2e-install.pnpm.md';
import ScaffoldPluginE2EInstallYarn from '@snippets/plugin-e2e-install.yarn.md';

> The [`@grafana/e2e`](https://www.npmjs.com/package/@grafana/e2e) tool will be depcrecated when Grafana 11.0.0 is released, and the support for this package will be dropped when Grafana 11.1.0 is released. We recommened all plugin authors to migrate their end-to-end tests to use Playwright and `@grafana/plugin-e2e` instead of Cypress and `@grafana/e2e`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The [`@grafana/e2e`](https://www.npmjs.com/package/@grafana/e2e) tool will be depcrecated when Grafana 11.0.0 is released, and the support for this package will be dropped. We recommend all plugin authors to migrate their end-to-end tests to use Playwright and `@grafana/plugin-e2e` instead of Cypress and `@grafana/e2e`.
```

In this guide you'll learn:

- how to manually setup `@grafana/plugin-e2e` in your plugin
- how to migrate tests

> - how to run Playwright tests in CI

Author: The manual installation bits could be moved to its own article...but for now I'll just reorganize the headings a bit. We can come back to this later.

- how to uninstall Cypress and `@grafana/e2e`

## Manually installing @grafana/plugin-e2e

> If you have a plugin that was not scaffolded with setup for `@grafana/plugin-e2e` and `@playwright/test`, you can follow these steps to set it up manually.

Reviewer 2: This sentence doesn't quite read right for me. I'm not sure its necessary in all honesty. If you want to keep something like it, maybe  could change to something like:

> Plugins scaffolded with `create-plugin` v4.5.0 and greater automatically include configuration for `@grafana/plugin-e2e` and `@playwright/test`. To add this configuration manually, follow these steps:

### Step 1: Installing Playwright

> The `@grafana/plugin-e2e` tool extends Playwright APIs, so you need to have `@playwright/test` with a minimum version of 1.41.2 installed as a dev dependency in the `package.json` file of your plugin. Refer to the [Playwright documentation](https://playwright.dev/docs/intro#installing-playwright) for instruction on how to install. Make sure you can run the example tests that were generated during the installation. If the example tests ran successfully, you may go ahead and delete as they won't be needed anymore.

Reviewer: go ahead and delete _them_

   Your Playwright config should have the following project configuration:

```ts title="playwright.config.ts"
import { dirname } from 'path';
import { defineConfig, devices } from '@playwright/test';

const pluginE2eAuth = `${dirname(require.resolve('@grafana/plugin-e2e'))}/auth`;

export default defineConfig({
    ...
    projects: [
    {
      name: 'auth',
      testDir: pluginE2eAuth,
      testMatch: [/.*\.js/],
    },
    {
      name: 'run-tests',
      use: {
        ...devices['Desktop Chrome'],
        // @grafana/plugin-e2e writes the auth state to this file,
        // the path should not be modified
        storageState: 'playwright/.auth/admin.json',
      },
      dependencies: ['auth'],
    }
  ],
});
```

The authenticated state is stored on disk with the following file name pattern: `<plugin-root>/playwright/.auth/<username>.json`.

To prevent these files from being version controlled, you can add the following line to your `.gitignore` file:

```shell title=".gitignore"

> /playwright/.auth/

Author: Yes good catch!

```

The `@grafana/plugin-e2e` package also exports a type named `PluginOptions` that you can use to extend the Playwright configuration with the `@grafana/plugin-e2e` specific options.

```ts title="playwright.config.ts"
import { defineConfig } from '@playwright/test';
import type { PluginOptions } from '@grafana/plugin-e2e';

export default defineConfig<PluginOptions>({
    ...
});

> ```

Reviewer 3: nit: I would combine this with the above playwright.config.ts snippet so it's a copy and paste once rather than copy and paste then manually update with this typing.

You're now ready to start writing tests. The [Get started](../get-started.md) guide to learn how to run tests locally.

## Migrating tests

> There's no tooling in place for migrating existing `@grafana/e2e` based Cypress tests to `@grafana/plugin-e2e` based Playwright test. You may checkout the following resources to get inspiration:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There's no tooling in place for automatically migrating existing `@grafana/e2e` based Cypress tests to `@grafana/plugin-e2e` based Playwright tests. This means you would have to convert your tests one by one or replace them with a new set of tests based on Playwright. You may checkout the following resources to get inspiration on how the playwright tests should be written:
```

> There's no tooling in place for automatically migrating existing `@grafana/e2e` based Cypress tests to `@grafana/plugin-e2e` based Playwright tests. This means you would have to convert your tests one by one or replace them with a new set of tests based on Playwright. You may checkout the following resources to get inspiration on how the playwright tests should be written:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
There's no tooling in place for automatically migrating existing `@grafana/e2e` based Cypress tests to `@grafana/plugin-e2e` based Playwright tests. This means you would have to convert your tests one by one or replace them with a new set of tests based on Playwright. Refer to the following resources to get inspiration on how the playwright tests should be written:
```

- [How to test data source plugins](./test-a-data-source-plugin/index.md)

> <!-- - [How to test panel plugins](./test-a-panel-plugin.md) -->

Reviewer 2: Something here is messing with the rendering
<img width="316" alt="Screenshot 2024-04-05 at 14 03 11" src="https://github.com/grafana/plugin-tools/assets/19860021/4de9ce7f-6a86-44f6-b7ab-c3a8a4044074">

Author: Yep I've removed the commented line now

> <!-- - [How to test panel plugins](./test-a-panel-plugin.md) -->

Reviewer 3: I think this comment is causing excess whitespace with MDX:

![image](https://github.com/grafana/plugin-tools/assets/73201/d3987471-a92d-481d-993b-a0012d32d304)

Author: Alright - I'll remove it entirely. Will open a new pr next week when the panel guide is merged.

- [App plugin with example tests](https://github.com/grafana/grafana-plugin-examples/tree/main/examples/app-basic/tests)
- [Panel plugin with example tests](https://github.com/grafana/grafana-plugin-examples/tree/main/examples/panel-datalinks/tests)
- [Best practices around test isolation](./setup-resources.md#test-isolation)

> - `@grafana/plugin-e2e` exposes Grafana end-to-end selectors via the `Selectors` fixture, so you no longer need to use selectors exposed via the `@grafana/e2e-selectors` package. Read more about end-to-end selectors in the [Selecting UI elements](./selecting-ui-elements.md) guide.

Reviewer 2: This looks strange, either just remove from the bullets and have as its own paragraph. Or shorten to "How to select UI elements".

## Running tests in CI

To run Playwright tests targeting multiple versions of Grafana in CI, use one of the example workflows in the [CI](./ci.md) guide.

:::note

> Note that Grafana does not offer any way to run end-to-end tests targeting multiple versions of Grafana in other CI platforms such as Drone.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note that Grafana does not offer any way to run end-to-end tests targeting multiple versions of Grafana in other CI platforms such as Drone or CircleCI.
```

:::

## Uninstalling Cypress and @grafana/e2e

Although we recommend moving from `@grafana/e2e` to `@grafana/plugin-e2e` in a timely manner, there's nothing preventing you from having the two side by side during a transitional phase.

When all Cypress tests have been migrated, open the terminal and run the following scripts from within your local plugin development directory:

> ### 1. Remove tests and config file

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### 1. Remove Cypress tests and config file
```

> Although we recommend moving from `@grafana/e2e` to `@grafana/plugin-e2e` in a timely manner, there's nothing preventing you from having the two side by side during a transitional phase.

Reviewer 2: We could warn here about issues targeting versions greater than 11 using cypress

Author: I don't think it's necessary. We've already made it clear at the top of the page that the package won't be supported after G11.

Reviewer 2: I think theres a difference between not being supported and not working entirely, people might just expect that no new features would be added and fixes not applied. But not a blocker by any sense

```shell
rm ./cypress.json
rm -rf ./cypress
```

### 2. Uninstall dependencies

```shell
npm uninstall --save-dev @grafana/e2e @grafana/e2e-selectors
```

### 3. Update scripts

In the `package.json` file, remove the `e2e:update` script entirely and update the `e2e` the following way:

> <Tabs>

Reviewer 3: I'm not sure we need these tabs. The script to run playwright for any of the package managers can be:

`"e2e": "playwright test",`

<TabItem value="npm" default>
`"e2e": "npx playwright test",`
</TabItem>
<TabItem value="yarn" >
`"e2e": "yarn playwright test",`
</TabItem>

> <TabItem value="npx">

Author: I removed them 👍
